For all the students uh,
Anything regarding the labs or lectures
assignments you have to communicate
with your lab instructor so you
have to see in what lab section you
registered and whether Zara or Roonak.
they are responsible for your marks or.
Solving your issues regarding any submission.
If you for instance want
to open a new attempt,
you have to send an email to them.
They can open a new attempt if
you want to review your marks or
whatever regarding your submission.
This reference is your lab instructor.
And then if they couldn't solve your
problem or they couldn't answer you,
I mean quickly get back to me.
I'll try my best to answer your questions.
Yes, and again we don't have any lab one.
Uh, because the lab numbers
are based on the week numbers,
so we are the labs or any any
submissions start from the week two,
so the lab 2 and lecture 2.
So the numbers. I mean,
that's the logic behind the numbers.
Also in the reading week we don't
have any lab or lecture submission.
In the last week of the semester also,
we don't have any submissions.
OK, so let's start off.
Again, we are still in the chapter.
One from the book.
So we are still developing.
Uhm?
Numbering system and gradually
we want to move toward building
a digital system that works with
digits or numbers and then we will
explain why among all these number
systems we want to choose binary
for building a computer system.
Uh. This is not,
I just wanted to add last lecture.
We said that we have base-2, base-
5, base-4 any different number
system from any call to find some
Maya number system which is based 20.
Uh, in the discussion board?
Uh, uh, there is a threat
about other numbering systems,
such as some areas.
I mean, in the age old years,
a day use base 60.
So why Base-10 becomes very common
and gradually becomes the most
common number system in all cultures?
cecilia and also in the discussion board jyoti
Uh, they uh. Give this idea that
because we have 10 fingers,
that's the immediate way to count things.
By our I mean body parts.
So and then I did some more
search and I found this in.
Uh, in online web.
So this is a book by a Georges ifrah
for a about history of numbers,
and this is the code from the book
that basically yes it can be shown
that that's the reason why base 10 is.
Became the most common number system because
we use our fingers for cardinal numbers.
Uh, for instance,
if you want to say that how many Members
in a in a team you simultaneously show,
for instance, 3 fingers for some
free means free members or four.
Or if you want to count,
you will start.
I mean in succession 123 and etc.
And that's amazing because.
Just yesterday I think it was
yesterday or two days ago I was in
a workshop about Chinese culture.
In order to know what are their culture,
because I think.
Uh, the Chinese New Year is very close.
Is there any student from China
in the class or knows the culture?
A great yes. I mean, next week we're
going to have the new year in China.
Uh, and I think the new year is tiger
symbol, so I was in that workshop.
And interestingly, they.
I mean explain in China.
In Chinese culture they can
count up until 10 by just one.
A finger. It's still for the 10,
uh, this picture doesn't show that,
but it's still with the 10.
They can't count it by just one hand.
And it's interesting, uh, so.
We all can count up until five,
but in Chinese culture you can count 6-7.
Basically these are the figures very close
to the written format of the numbers,
for instance 9 and 10.
You see by just one hand they can't show it.
By just one hand.
Also in Sumerian culture.
In old ages, are they?
Their numbers was based on base.
60 so the powers of 60.
And they could.
account, based on, uh,
these parts of the fingers.
And uh, for instance,
if you reach the second hand,
it means that you went through
all these points one time and
then second time and etc.
So. Again, I mean,
these are the evidence that why,
uh, I mean different number
system based on counting,
but fingers developed?
So now we want to discuss if we
have different numbering system.
Is it possible to convert between them?
If I I've given a number and
in a base in numbering system?
Or is it possible to bring it to
another number in another basis?
Uh, what we covered today is that
only the numbering system that are
based on radix numbering system,
meaning that the position.
So we only discussed the conversion
between radix numbering system.
And based on the radix numbering system,
the position has significance based
on the power of the radix number.
So we only discussed the conversion
between these numbering system
radix numbering system.
So here is the schematic figure,
so any number in base radix-r we want to,
uh, convert it to another base or prime?
We already saw that any number in any
basis or can be easily converted to
base 10 or decimal system and it was
based on this mathematical formula.
So we have to just simply multiply.
If you have fraction point in the left part,
you have the integer part in the
right part fraction part and.
We have to simply multiply each digit
at each position to the significance
of that position and then sum them
all together in the right part of
the significance are based on the
negative powers of r in the left
side based on the positive powers of r.
We already saw that,
but the main challenge is that is it
possible to convert back any number
in decimal system to base our system.
So you may know the algorithm, but.
I just wanted to show that I mean how
we can gradually create new algorithm
or come up with the algorithm.
I could simply give you the
algorithm and you go step-by-step,
but The thing is that the important
thing is that you have to know the logic
behind the algorithm, because I mean,
in some new cases you want to create
new algorithm that doesn't exist.
So you have to come up with a
novel algorithm.
So in order to see.
What is the algorithm if you
want to convert a number in
decimal system to a new base R?
A number system.
We can simulate the conversion of
a number in decimal to itself.
Just to see what is an algorithm.
So the idea is that when you convert
between the numbering system,
you have to figure out what are
the digits at each position.
That's the conversion.
So if you are given a number in base 10.
And we want to see what are
the digits or numbers in each
position of the decimal system.
What would be the approach?
For instance,
in the first position that has
significance 10 to the power of 0?
This is the figure,
but how can we extract this from the number?
If you want to see what is the
digit in the position with the
significance 10 to the power of 1.
How can we extract this digit 3?
And then again,
this is the digit at this position.
So how can we extract it from this number?
So the idea is that.
If you want to see the
digit for this position.
You can shift right and you
can simply see the number.
Also, if you want to see the digit for
this position with this significance,
you have to shift twice.
And again, three time, four time and etc.
This way you can extract
by shifting to the right.
Or another way would be just each time that
you shift you your number gonna lose 1 digit.
So if you. Extract the 1st digit at
this position and shift right then.
This number becomes the next number at this
significant position 10 to the power of 0.
If you shift right and the previous
number loses the 1st digit.
So this way instead of.
Trying to find the digits of different
positions with different significance.
By shifting to the right,
we can say that we are always trying to
find the digit at the first position or
at the significance 10 to the power of 0.
And this can be simply.
Done by division by 10.
So each number divided by 10.
The quotient becomes the digit of uh,
I mean, the first position of that number.
So for instance, if you are given
this number and divide it by 10,
the quotient gonna be this.
And the remaining sorry the remainder
gonna be the digit of the opposition,
so the quotient
Will be the remaining number.
And the remainder gonna be the uh,
digit of that position.
And now if we extract this position
and remove it from the number.
We have this new number and again
if we divide this new number by 10.
The cautions gonna be.
This number.
The remaining digits of the
number and the remainder gonna
be the digit of that the 1st
digit of the new number.
So you can see that each time that
you divide by a in in decimal system,
if you divide by 10.
The remainder gonna be the the digit
at the last right most position
and the quotient gonna be there,
all the remainder digits.
And you can continue this.
So now you extract this number
and now you have this new
number again you divide by 10.
The caution remaining digits and
the remainder gonna be the digit
of the first rightmost position.
So why we extract the digits?
Because we want to always divide by
the same number 10 to the power of 1
in order to see what is the 1st digit.
So this is the algorithm,
so this way you can extract
each digit of a decimal number.
So 4 digit of the position 10
to the power of 0.
You have to do 0 + 1 or one division.
And then the 2nd digit you have to do.
In order to see the digit of this position,
you have to do 2 division by 10.
And keep the remainders.
And then again the third number,
third division.
4 and up until you have the quotient 0.
Then you have the quotient 0.
It means that if you continue the division,
the result  gonna be 0
and the remainder gonna be 0.
So I mean it's.
Futile to continue your division.
And then,
because this is the remainder
of the last division,
it means that it's the digit of the highest,
most significant position.
So now if you want to write down the number,
you have to write it in the reverse order,
so three.
And then zero up until the remainder
of the first position division.
So this simple algorithm that brings
the decimal system to itself by
extracting the digit shows the algorithm.
So now if the target base has the
base-r we can do the same steps,
we can divide by the base-r keep
the remainder up until we see the
Quotient 0 and then reverse right down
the remainder in the reverse order.
So assuming that we want to convert
from the decimal number to 16,
we have to see what are the
digits at the new system 16.
So what is the 1st digit?
What is the 2nd digit?
What is the 3rd digit and etc.
So. By multiple division by 16
we can see what are the digits
in the new target number system.
So. If you want to see that
the digit of this position,
what is the digit of this position
you have to do one division.
And keep the remainder.
So this is the digit of the first position
and then you continue with the quotient.
2nd digit.
Second division.
3rd Division's 3rd digit.
The remainder gonna be the third division.
4th up until you see.
Uh, the quotient zero.
You stop here because if you
continue the remainder gonna be
0 and the quotient gonna be 0.
And then you write down the
digits in the reverse order,
because this is the last digit.
The highest significant
position or this position?
So it comes here.
And the only thing in base 16 is that,
uh, we don't have digit for 12.
You don't have digit for 14,
we don't have digit for 15.
We have to put the correct digit
or numeral for these values.
So we already know that the
base 16 after nine we have a.
As. 9 + 1 which is 10.
B is next level 11 up until F which is 15.
So based on this mapping.
This becomes the conversion,
so this number in decimal system becomes.
This number is base 16 or hexadecimal.
So very similar steps for any
other target number system.
So you have to simply.
Extract or figure out what are the digits
in the base 8 by the multiple division by 8.
So. This is the number, the same number
that we already converted to the base 16.
And you see that because
base 16 is more powerful,
the significance is based on the power of 16.
We need less number of position
for the same decimal number.
Now that we want to bring
it to the base eight,
base eight is less powerful because the
powers of eight gonna have the significance.
So we expect that we need more positions.
In order to see the digits,
the First Division,
the remainder of the First Division,
the 1st digit, the remainder of second
multiplication by the quotient.
Again, you have to continue
the division by the quotient.
And the remainder of the second
division going to be the 2nd digit.
And uh, etc.
Up until you reach the quotient 0,
you stop here and write back the numbers.
The same is for a quartenary
number system or base 4.
Again, base 4 the significance are
based on the powers of four we need.
We expect that we need more position. So.
Multiple division by 4 keep the remainder.
Continue with the quotient.
3, 0 and etc. So up until you reach the
quotient 0, you stop and write back
the remainders in the reverse order.
Or if you want to continue
from the First Division,
you have to write it back this way.
And to the power of 2.
Again, very similar algorithm.
As you can see here base two less powerful.
You need more position to
write down the same number.
And you need more than a division to.
Create the digits of each position.
Up until you reach the quotient 0.
So. That's the algorithm.
So the idea is that just generating
the digits of the new target system.
The whenever you forget the algorithm,
you try to come up with the algorithm
converting decimal to decimal to
itself and then you know that you need
multiple division to extract each digit.
Uh, and then you can apply the
same algorithm for any bases.
So divide the quotients by
the target radix number.
And then keep the remainder of the digits in
R and put the remainders in reverse order.
The only exception here is that
if you are in a base that has. Uh.
A specific symbol or numeral for some
numbers you have to replace them,
for instance in base 16 if you
if your remainder is 15,
you have to replace it by valid
number or symbol which is F.
Any question?
I believe most of you know the algorithm,
but again, just to know the logic behind the
conversion is just extracting the digits
of the new number system. No question.
OK, so it seems there's no question,
but I need you to send me some feedback.
In the chat box. Just to make
sure that everyone has the focus,
we have 78 student in the class.
Great, so most of.
Good.
Awesome, so since there is no
question everybody has the focus.
So the next question is that.
Now that I can convert to base to
any number system to base 10 and
reverse base 10 to any number system.
What if I want to convert from any number
system to any other number system so it's
not limited to 10 in any number system?
Or to our prime, for instance,
base two to base. 6 or.
Vice versa base six to base-2.
So. Any idea?
If you want to come up with an
algorithm to convert that in any basis,
or to base our prime,
knowing that you can convert
to base 10 and vice versa.
Do you have any idea?
OK, so let me give you some hints.
So we have a black box or we
have an algorithm or steps that
whatever number you input.
It can, uh, map it to.
Another number in base ten.
We know that also we have another
algorithm or a black box or
steps that if we put a number.
In decimal system it can map it to any.
A number, for instance.
X in. R or R prime.
So as you can see here,
if you have these two algorithm,
you have to simply attack
these two boxes to each other.
So a number in base R can be
mapped to the base 10 and then
base 10 can be fed to the new
algorithm to the new steps and
then we can have a new number in
a new numbering system or prime.
So this was based on the math
formula that we discussed.
The multiplication of each digit to
the significance and sum together.
So multiply and then sum.
In order to convert it to 10 and then
from 10 we need divisions and remainders.
In order to convert to our prime.
So you see, by using or reusing
the same existing algorithms,
you can come up with new algorithm.
So here is the solution you have to
mediate through decimal system you bring
to the base 10 and then you convert base
10 to the new number system are prime.
Ahmed is correct, yes.
Also, Gabriel is correct, yes.
So. Here is an example.
Imagine that we have this number in
base 16 and we want to bring it to.
Base 8 so we have this number in base 16.
We want to convert it to a
new number in base 8.
So what would be the path the path
would be first, bring it to base 10.
This is the math formula,
so multiplication of each digit to
the significance of that position.
So three multiply by 16 to
the power of 0 and then B.
Multiply by 16 to the power of 1,
but we know that B is equal to 11,
so you have to simply replace it by 11.
And then F multiplied by because it's in
the third position 16 to the power of 2.
F * 6 into power of two F is equal to 15
and etc and then sum them altogether.
And this becomes the number in base 10.
Now you have to bring it to base eight in
order to generate the digits of base eight.
You have to divide.
Keep the remainder so you divide by 8,
because this is the target number system.
You keep the remainder,
you continue division the
division by the quotient.
2nd digit 3rd digit up until
the last digit and then you
write it in the reverse order.
So now that we can convert any.
A number from any basis source
bases to any target number system.
The next question would be
that we already said that the
number system can have fraction.
So far we could convert the uh,
Integer parts how about the fraction part?
Before I go with the algorithm
for the fraction, do you have any
idea how to generate the numbers?
Uh, the digits for the fraction positions.
So again, like the previous algorithm,
if we don't have any algorithm in our mind,
we could say that.
The most common number system is
decimal system number, base 10,
so let's see how we can generate
the fraction digits in base 10.
So again, similar to the previous algorithm,
we can convert a number with fraction.
2. In base-10 to itself.
Although it is trivial,
but it gives us an idea how
to generate the digits.
So imagine you have a fraction number
in base 10 and you want to bring it
back to the base 10 the same base.
In another word,
you want to generate the digits.
So if you have a number fraction
number in base 10.
How you can generate the digits?
So this digit 2
In the position 10 to the power of minus one.
How we can generate this?
Uh, what algorithm you need or what
mathematical operation you need
just to print out the. This digit.
So if you are given this number
and you are asked to just add,
put the 1st digit.
Correct, actually as karandeep says.
Cecilia says you have to simply
multiply this number by 10.
If you multiply by this this number
by 10 two comes to the integer
part and you can simply floor it.
And you just keep the integer part,
which becomes the 2.
And then you can shift left and then
do another multiplication by 10 or
without shifting you can multiply
by 10 to the power of 2 or 100.
This way in the integer part
you're going to have.
26.501
and then you have two and six and etc.
So. That's the idea.
The idea is that you multiply by 10.
When you are generating the first number,
you can you a shift left.
You remove this and then
continue multiply by 10.
Next digit multiply by. Again.
If you multiply this by 10 becomes 6.500.
You keep this one as the next digit.
You remove it and you continue
multiplication by the remainder
fraction part multiplied by 10.
Five, you keep it.
You continue with the remaining part.
This way, by series of multiplication,
you can generate the digits
in the fraction positions.
Again, as you can see, here is an example.
You just multiply by 10.
You gonna have two points.
The remainder fraction position.
You keep the integer part
and you continue with the.
Remaining fraction position.
Then next multiplication,
I'm going to have six point,
something you keep the integer part.
In math, in order to keep the integer part,
you can do the floor operation and then you
continue with the remaining fraction part.
And here is the series of multiplication,
so multiply by 10.
Here is the result.
Keep the integer part.
Continue with the remaining fraction part.
Keep the integer part.
Continue with the remaining fraction part.
And etc.
And gradually you are
generating the first position.
Second position,
third position and so this time you
just write down the digits in the
right order from the first to the end.
So when you stop,
The thing is that if you reach the code,
I mean the last fraction position is 0.
As you can see here.
If you continue the multiplication by 10,
so you just generating 0.
And you know that.
I mean a zero in the right side of the
fraction part doesn't have any value,
because multiplication by zero is 0.
So then you can stop here.
When you reach the remaining
fraction point point is 0.
Sometimes you don't end with any.
I mean you don't end with zero
fraction part and you have to
continue sometimes forever.
That's why sometimes you have
to consider how many positions
you have in the fraction part
and you have to stop there.
So here is an example.
Now we want to bring 10 to
the base 16 the fraction part.
So this same idea in order to generate
the digits in the fraction position,
you have to multiply by.
The radix number of the new number system.
The target number system.
So the same number.
This time we want to
bring it to the base 16.
We multiply by 16.
A week chip, the integer part.
We continue with the
remaining fraction part.
So this is the 1st digit at the
position 16 to the power of minus one.
And then you continue multiplication.
The 2nd digit. And then we continue
with the remaining fraction part.
And etc. Whenever we see some values
that are not valid in the base 16,
we have to replace it. 13 is equal
to the alphabet or symbol D editor.
Up until we reach the.
Uh. As you can see here,
if you multiply 16 by this number,
it becomes 0.04 point
0. Their remaining fraction
part is zero. You stop here.
So. You can practice at home
10-8, 10-4
But The thing is that you can
simply do it by excel sheet.
I just wanted to show you very simple,
uh, I mean excel sheet how you can do it.
Or you can write a C program.
One of your practice is actually,
I think. Uhm?
Yes, and I mean in next two or three
weeks later you're gonna have a lab
write up C program to do the conversion,
but I just wanted to show you in Excel.
How you can simply write it, uh?
Very simple.
Excel sheet to do that for you.
So imagine that we want to.
Convert integer part.
Are you able to see my
screen now? Wait a second?
Oh great so.
So let me zoom in a little bit.
OK so if you have integer A for
instance, you want to bring in.
Number have the integer N and the
radius number is for instance.
Or and also you want to
do the fraction part.
Again, from the fraction for M
to the same radius number R.
So let's put a number, for instance 126.
And we want to bring it in decimal system?
Uh, we want to bring it to.
Uh, I don't know. base-5.
And it has a fraction,
for instance 326.
And sorry, 326.
And the same base-5.
So basically the number was
126.326 and we want to.
Convert to Base 5.
So in order to do this.
Integer part you have to simply
say that you have to divide by
5 in order to see the digits.
So I can start here.
You have to say that what is the remainder?
The remainder in Excel in most of the.
Programming languages, percent or module,
is the synonym for remainder.
So you can do mode as you can
see here it says returns the
remainder after divided by divisor.
So I will need it module of this number.
Divided by this number.
And here is the remainder.
So here is the 1st digit.
In this file.
And then I have to continue with the quotient.
So in order to see the quotient in Excel,
it is called as you can see here,
quotient returns integer
portion of the division.
So you have to simply select
the quotient and the quotient
of this division by 5.
Where is the quotient
And then you have to continue this by 5.
And see the division.
So here is the formula you have to simply
replicate the formula for this one.
And then you have to simply replicate this.
And also. You have to simply.
Replicate 5 here.
So as you can see here.
So here's the first question.
Third, quotient, etc.
Up until you reach the quotient 0,
you stop here.
Because as you can see here,
all the other digits are zero and then
you write it in the reverse order.
So let me put a arrow.
You write it in reverse order.
So the integer part gonna be.
000 ultimate zero.
I mean many zeros up until this position.
Or you can simply just
start from this position.
So it becomes 1001.
This is the integer part
and now we want to see so.
integer part.
Thoughts for now in base 5.
Let's see what is the, uh?
fraction plot for the fraction
plot you have to multiply.
By, The radix number.
I keep the integer part so.
For the integer part, you have to
say that first you have to multiply.
This number. By the radix number.
If you do this.
You see here we have the 1.63,
but we need only one.
So in order to keep that. Uh.
You have to apply floor operations,
so floor means that.
The largest integer number
lower than your number,
so floor math.
And then it keeps the integer part.
The remaining fraction part,
which was 65. You have to.
Do the actual multiplication
minus the integer part.
So this is equal to the actual
multiplication of this number.
By this number.
But minus the integer part.
To the remaining fraction numbers, and
then you have to continue the same formula.
So I'll just keep this here and then.
This one here. And then this one here.
OK, so is that right?
One thing is that always you have to
check that the generate the generate.
The digits are valid digits in your bases,
so as you can see here in base 5 all
these digits are less than five.
And. Here's a very good example,
because you can see that.
After some uh multiplication, it reaches a.
Exact, I mean 75,
zero point 75 and each time that
you have to multiply the fraction,
the integer part is 3,
the remaining is the same, so it repeats.
So if you want to write down the
fraction part, you have to just.
This way, so the fraction part gonna be 1.
So that's.
13033333 etc that we gonna be repeated.
Or you can say that three bar you
can put the board sign in order to
show that three gonna be repeated.
So you see that when you're come,
we already saw that converting
fraction positions or fraction
numbers may introduce some error,
and it depends on the number of
positions that we have or number.
I mean how precise we are.
Here you see an example.
We can never convert this number
exactly to the base file because.
Even if you have infinite position in
the fraction point you never reach,
you become more precise,
less error.
But you never become an exact
number in the target base file.
That's an instance that it is possible,
sometimes always that you never.
Convert a number in the number
system to a target with exact number.
You have to accept some error and
here is the error.
So in order to calculate the error so
the final number in base 5 going to be
1001.130 and then three,
and then three going to be repeated.
Base 5 so. Now you have
to calculate the error.
What is the error if you
are given for instance?
Only four fraction position.
So this is the number.
Even only four fraction position in base 5.
So you have used only four of these.
How can I change the yeah?
Only these four, assuming that you
only limited to four positions.
So what is the error?
Any idea?
If if I've given up, for
instance 5 position. It becomes
1001.13. 5 position.
And now the error is less.
But what is the error?
Great Christine says that we can
convert the new number back the
base 10 and then do the subtraction
and see the error correct.
So in order to see this error
we have to. Convert.
We have to convert this number.
To a number in base 10.
And then after that we have to subtract.
So you have to convert it to the
new number. base 10 and after that.
I think it accept this as a.
The formula. You'll have
to commute to base 10.
And then after that you have to.
Subtract the original number.
126.326 minus this number and this
becomes the error in decimal.
So how can we convert
this back to the base ten?
We have to multiply each digit by
the significance of that position.
And sum them together.
So let's do that. Using our lovely source
There is an online app that you
can convert it and see the results,
so I just want to show.
You do this. Uh, wait a second.
Here is the app that you can use
to check whether you are doing
the conversion, correct or.
No, I I will put the link.
So here is a very good web app that
does the transformation for you.
So now what was our number?
Our number was this.
Mean. Base. 5. And, uh,
the target gonna be 10.
As you can see here, the target
number in decimal system is this.
And this is there.
So if you see what is. The air.
And this is there.
If we use five position.
So let's back here five position
and see what is the new number.
The new number.
Is this impact in base 10?
So then you have to say
that the original number.
Minus this new number.
Which becomes.
Here. And this is the error.
See the error becomes less,
but still there are some error.
In the exam in midterm or final exam,
whenever you are asked to do the conversion,
you have to write down all these
multiplication or you just take a
snapshot of this excel sheet and.
Show the error or you have to
show the steps in order to.
See how you calculate the error.
OK, so let's back this slide.
So the next is that now if we have
so we already said that if you
have both the integer part and
the fraction part very simple,
we do the conversion for integer part.
We do the conversion for the fraction part
separately and then we concede them together.
So we first do the integer part,
then the fraction part and
then concede them together.
Here is an example we already
saw in the Excel sheet.
Assuming that we have this number in base 10.
I want to bring it to base 8.
We do the conversion for.
The integer part by series of division
keeping the remainder in the reverse order.
And we do the conversion for fraction
part by series of multiplication,
keeping the integer part
from the right order.
In the lecture assignment there is a
question that basically says that.
If you are converting between base 2.
And those numbering system that are
the radix is powers of. For instance,
you're converting between two and four,
two and eight, two and 16, or two and 32.
For this specific versions of conversion,
there is a faster algorithm,
very fast in the lecture assignment
you can read and see what is the.
A faster way to do that
instead of just series of.
Instead of just bringing it,
base two to base 10 and then bring
it back to these bases so there's
a faster way to do that.
You can directly convert to base four,
or we can directly convert to base 8.
Also the reverse.
If you are in in a number system that
the radix number is the powers of two,
there is a direct way to bring
it back to base two.
If you are in phase four,
you can directly bring it to base two without
bringing it back to base 10 and then 10 to 2.
Also.
Eight to two.
So read the lecture assignment
and learn that fast way.
So because it's a huge help
for checking your answers.
And this is the link that I used for
checking the answers you are able to use.
Check your answers in midterm exam
or whatever whether you are doing
the correct calculation or not.
The beauty of this app is that.
It also shows you the error.
The conversion error.
So you can calculate your error
and you can compare the error that
you calculated by this app to make
sure that you are doing correct.
0h, one more thing is that here you can't
increase the number of positions.
Decimal positions and fraction position
to see if you have more position.
There's a less error if you have
less a position you have more error.
And, uh. The next topic is arithmetic.
So. Now we know that how to measure
or how to represent a discrete entity
by using symbols in number system,
specifically the radix number system.
For instance, base two base eight base 10,
and attach. The next.
Is that how can we do arithmetic?
How can we do addition?
How can we do subtraction
division multiplication between
numbers in the number system?
So before that I'm ready
to take your questions.
Damion says that do we convert
that number to base ten?
Yes, because usually when
we want to show the error,
we show the error in base 10.
That's why the best way is that
bring it back to the base 10,
do the subtraction and see the error.
One of the questions in the lecture
assignment was that what is the error
of converting a number in from Base 2?
Oh, this is very good example.
If you are converting from
a number in base 2.
That has a fraction point,
for instance X point Y to
for instance X prime.
Why prime in another basis?
For instance base?
16 so here you have to be
careful that for this you
have to convert it to base.
and then from base 10 to base 16.
There will be an error in this
conversion E1 and there will be
an error from this conversion.
E2. And the whole conversion
error would be E1 plus E2.
So you see, what are the sources of the
error and the main source is because just.
The a fraction position and how many position
you want to allocate to the conversion.
So imagine in the questions usually
says that you are given. Four position.
And, uh, only three of them.
Four fraction one of them
for the integer part or.
You are given four position,
2 for the fraction part 2 for integer part.
So based on different assumption,
you're going to have different error.
No, we don't represent
error in percentage.
We show the exact error,
but in decimal system.
Usually we always be represent
error in decimal system.
OK. So now let's see what
is the arithmetic addition.
You may find these slides very
trivial because you know how to
do addition in decimal system,
but we just want to remind
you how to do the addition.
Other system based on the same algorithm.
So for instance, in base 16,
if you want to do the addition,
then main important part, not the main one.
The first important part is that you
have to align these two numbers.
Because they may have different number
of figures in fraction and integer parts,
this is called padding.
So in integer part you can add more
zero in the right side and in the in
the fraction part and in integer part
you can add zero in the left side
because it doesn't have an impact.
So this is called padding, just to
make sure that both numbers are same size.
And then you start the edition.
So 4 + 0 four 5 + B.
You have to remind that B is equal to 11,
it becomes 1616 is one round over all digits.
It cannot be represented,
so you have to divide by the base 16.
It creates a carry to the next level
and you have to keep the remainder.
Very similar to the decimal system.
But you have to be careful about
these symbols.
So 1 + e + 2 E is equal to 14,
so it becomes 15 + 2=17.
17 cannot be represented in more than is.
It is greater than 15, so you have to
divide by 16 one and the remainder is 1.
So it creates 1 carry
And then you keep the remainder.
And again, we don't keep any
position for fraction points.
And now we have 1 + 8,
which is 10 + F, which is 15.
So in total we're going to have
26 / 16 one carry.
And then the remainder 10.
And 10 is equal to a.
And then you continue the addition
1 + 2 + B, which is 11=14.
Fourteen is equal to what? Alphabet. 14
correct yes. And 0 + 4 and
this is the final number.
In order to multiply,
multiply is a series of addition.
So I let you to do at home.
In week five or week seven
week six we're gonna.
Build a device that does the multiplication.
We refer back to the multiplication,
but for now you can practice at home.
How to do multiplication
by series of addition.
So basically X * y is
equal to Y plus itself.
How many times X times?
The next main operation is the subtraction.
Subtraction is very tricky.
Based on the idea of borrow,
but we have to see what is borrow.
So assuming that we just wanted to do
this subtraction in decimal system,
most of you know how to do this,
but you may not know.
What's the logic behind that?
So the first thing here is that again,
at any operation you have to make
them equal size or equal position.
You have to do padding.
So the first number in the
integer project add zero in the
left side for the fraction part
to add zero in the right side.
So padding is always should be done.
You see how we are going toward building
machine to do the operation for us?
And then after padding you have to start
doing the subtraction digit by digit.
So 4 - 0 becomes 4.
5 - 6 It's not possible in high in
primary school you know that you
have to borrow from the highest
significant position because
you cannot do this subtraction.
It needs help, it helps.
Ask help for the highest significant
position or ask for a borrow.
When you do borrow from the
highest significant position,
we are in the base 10.
So this position has a significance
of 10 to the power of minus one.
So when you do borrow,
you borrow at the unit of 10.
So basically you multiply by
1 unit of 10. To the position
of 10 to the power of minus 2.
So then you add these two and
then do the subtraction with six.
So 10 + 5 - 6 becomes 9.
Now you already borrowed 1 unit.
And from one unit so.
1 - 1 zero minus zero becomes 0.
And then here again 1 - 2 it's not possible.
You asked for a borrow.
Each borrow from high significant
position adds 1 unit of 10.
So you borrow 1 unit you have plus 10 here.
You do the 10 + 1 because you borrowed
and now you can do the subtraction.
11 - 2 becomes 9.
And here you have minus one.
You already borrowed 1 unit,
SO2 becomes 2 - 1.
And then minus three so.
Minus 1 + 2 becomes 1 - 3.
Again, it's not possible,
so you need to borrow.
You borrow 1 unit.
Now you can do this subtraction,
so adding all these units 10.
Plus, 2, - 1 becomes 11, - 3 becomes 8.
And the next is minus one.
You already borrowed from a unit
that doesn't have any value,
so 0 - 1 becomes minus 1 - 4.
Minus one cannot be subtracted from 4,
so you need another borrow.
But this is very important.
There is no other position.
There is no higher number
that you borrowed from.
All the bar you did so far
was from your own number,
but now you are borrowing from
a position that doesn't exist.
So for now,
you borrow 1 unit from a
position that doesn't exist.
You imagine that you have a number
1000.000 and you borrow from that number.
So now you can do the subtraction so
plus 10 - 1 + 0 becomes 9 - 4 five.
So is this the correct? Result.
So usually what you do is that
because you know that the first number
is lower than the second number,
you do the reverse.
You basically switch the numbers.
But, uh, actually, according to these steps,
uh, this is not the correct number.
So, but The thing is that having.
This is called last borrow
Having the last borrow means that the first
number is lower than the second number.
As a result, you know that the
result gonna be a negative number,
but we don't know how to represent
negative numbers.
So far, all the numbers so far were
positive or they don't have any sign,
so this is the first occurrence that
sometimes in operation we receive
a number that is not positive.
We need a sign.
So by last quarter we know that the first
number is lower than the second number.
We have to fix the. Result because
this is not the correct result.
In order to fix that.
By last borrow.
You have to remind that this last borrow
is borrowed from a higher number.
You assume that you already had a
higher number that you borrowed from.
You have to return that borrow
So based on math operation,
when we did this subtraction.
This number was large.
I mean, the first number were
lower than the second number.
All this is not what we did was
that this is not the correct slide.
What we did was that.
We borrowed from a higher number.
But we have to return it back.
So basically I have to fix this slide.
Basically we add.
This large number to this number.
But we have to return it back.
So the results are. So let me.
Fix this. So we had
021.154. We couldn't subtract
this from the larger number.
We add a higher number
100.000.
But when we added,
we have to subtract it because.
Then becomes the actual subtraction.
When we did this.
Minus the actual number
589.094 it ends with this number.
Now we have to subtract this number from the.
Higher number that we borrowed from.
So this is the second subtraction
that we have to apply in order to
come up with the correct number.
So this was the right and wrong answer.
We have to return that higher number.
So we have to do another subtraction.
So this was the higher
number that we borrowed from.
Now we have to do another subtraction.
This was the previous result.
So 0 - 4 is not possible.
We do a borrow.
We have 10 - 4 six.
Here we have 0 - 9 we already borrowed one,
so it becomes minus 1 - 9,
which is not possible.
We do another borrow 10.
And now we can do 10 - 1 + 0 becomes
9 - 0 becomes a - 9 becomes 0.
Here again, we already borrowed 1 unit.
We have zero, we can it becomes minus one.
Plus 0 - 1 and you cannot
subtract this from zero because
minus 1 - 0 it's not possible.
We need to borrow. 10 units,
and now it becomes 10 - 1.
9-0=9.
And up until the last unit that
actually this one we borrowed 1.
10 minus one 9 - 5 becomes four and
this becomes the correct result.
So the idea is that when you
do the last borrow you are
borrowing from a higher number.
You do the calculation.
You have to return that higher number,
so this way you pick you come
up with the correct result,
but you already know that
the result is negative.
You put the negative sign.
So let's see in another example.
So imagine that again we want to
do this subtraction in base 16.
Again, first you have to do the padding.
Then do the subtraction digit by digit.
So again, this one.
5 - B is not possible.
You have to borrow from the higher position,
but we are in base 16.
We add units of 16.
Now we can do the subtraction.
So 16 + 5 becomes 21 - 11 becomes
10 and 10 is represented by a.
We already borrowed 1 unit from E, so E was.
14 - 1 becomes 13 - 2 becomes 11 and 11 is B.
And we continue this.
Again, A - F is not possible.
We need to borrow.
And then continue up until
the last unit minus one.
Plus zero becomes minus 1 - 4.
It's not possible, so we need a borrow,
but again this is going to be
borrowed from a higher number.
That is that doesn't exist.
So basically,
as soon that we have a number.
This number that you could borrow from that.
When you are asking for this,
borrow after doing the calculation
you have to return that.
So for now, you borrow from this
unit and you do the calculation
and this is the result.
But because you have a last borrow,
it means that the first number
was lower than the second number.
And then. We know that.
The result is negative because the
first number was lower than the second.
The first number was lower than
the second number, and we already
borrowed from that higher number.
We have to return that higher number.
So we add that higher number.
We have to now subtract that higher number.
So. We have to do another subtraction
from that higher number again 0 - 4.
This is the incorrect result
of the previous subtraction.
You have to fix it.
0 - 4 is not possible.
We need to borrow.
We are in base 16 units of 16.
And then 16 + 0 - 4 becomes
12.  12 is equal to C and etc.
And if you apply that,
this becomes the correct result
494.45C, but this is negative.
Division is series of subtraction,
so again you can do it at home.
But that's the basic idea of a borrow,
and the carry.
In addition, you have a carry in.
In subtraction, you need to borrow,
but for the subtraction,
the most important part is that.
If you have a last borrow,
it means that the result is negative.
You need another subtraction
by that higher number.
So that's the.
Problem that we have to solve.
Which is about negative numbers,
so let's back here. In this example,
we see that we have a negative number.
But we don't have any symbol or numerals
for negative sign or we
had was the sign or symbols,
4 digits from zero up until left in base 16.
Or in base-10. It's back to base-10.
All we have was the symbols
for zero up until 9
but we don't have any symbol for negative.
So in base 10 and base 16 or in other bases.
We cannot represent the
symbol negative or minus.
We have to come up with a number
system that can have negative numbers.
So what's the idea? So there.
How to represent or how to create
a symbol for a negative numbers?
Also, we could say that how
can we have signed numbers,
positive and negative numbers?
There are two ways to do that.
Uh, the first approach is called
signed magnitude and the second
one is called signed compliment.
I just wanted to,
I think we have two or three minutes.
Uh, I just wanted to give you the
idea that how can we expand the
number system to have signed numbers
and then we can continue next week.
So. So far as I said,
we have only numbers and we assume
that the numbers are positive.
Because after the subtraction operation,
you figure out that there are some
special cases that we need to.
We need a new symbol or negative sign.
So normally if you have one position,
we can have numbers from zero up
until nine that we consider positive.
But how can we have the same
numbers but with negative sign?
In the left side of the X axis.
So the first idea would be
that I could have a position.
That represent the sign.
So I can have the next position with
the significance 10 to the power of 1.
But in this position I can add a new
symbol to show the sign of the number.
But there is no symbol for
negative or for positive.
All the valid digits are
zero or nine up until nine.
Either we have to add a new symbol,
or I can use the existing values.
For positive we can add a new
symbol plus or we can reuse the
existing digits to show this sign.
And here is the approach.
We can say that we can add a new position
at the leftmost possible position.
We forget about the significance.
And we only consider zero as an
element for positive numbers.
And one as an element for negative numbers.
We have to forget about the significance.
We just add the leftmost or highest
most position, but we forget about the
significance and this is the contract.
If it is zero, it is positive.
If it is one, it is negative.
A better way for the negative
numbers would be this.
If it is zero, it is positive.
If it is non zero any other digits
from 1 to 9 can consider as a
representative for negative sign.
Again, you have to forget about
the significance of that position.
So this way if we have
numbers from zero to 9.
We need one position with the significance.
We need another position position
to just represent the sign,
but we have to forget about the significance.
If it is zero, it is positive.
If it is non zero, it is negative.
So in this case, if you have 20
20 is minus 0 if you have 35.
This is minus 5 because three is non 0,
so it's a.
It's a show case for negative
and this is fine.
For all positive numbers we have
080706 and attached.
As you can see here in this
system we have two zeros.
1020304050 up until 90. All of these
numbers is considered as negative 0.
And you have 00.
That shows that positive 0,
so you have negative 0 positive zero.
It's a problem with this system,
but it's an easy way to come up
with positive and negative numbers.
We are running out of time.
Uh, I will continue with, uh.
Adding uh assigned
numbers to a number system.
Uh, and this is the very basic idea.
By adding a new position
just to represent the sign,
we will see the other problems of
this system and we are gradually.
Adding. Improved version of a number
system with negative numbers. Oh,
sorry about that slide about the subtraction.
I have to fix that.
Slide this slide.
That adding the higher number and
subtracting the higher number.
That's it, any question?
I will be in the virtual office,
so any question I can explain more there.
You too have a great day guys and take care.
You too Kristen and you too Gabriel.
Thank you guys. Have a good
one shobhit shobhit sorry.
Sebastian have a good day. Take care.
Brenda, yu Chang have a great day domion.
Ryan, you 2 have a good day.
So let me stop the record.